---
permalink: /topology/0
layout: default
---

# Topology in Lean

The biggest difference between the usual approach to topology and the one here is the change if foundations. We will use Lean to formalize things as we go. Lean's foundations is dependent type theory which, for our purposes, differs in slight but significantly from the usual set theoretic approach.

### Set Theory versus Type Theory

The biggest difference between set theory and type theory is what comes first. In set theory, elements come first and are then collected into sets. In type theory, types come first and every term has a unique type. This makes the theory more precise in a sense. While `x ∈ X` is a proposition, that is, it may or may not hold, typing is a judgment, it holds at meta-theoretic level. 

    -- `α` is a type.
    variable α : Type
    -- `a` is a term of type `α`.
    variable a : α

    -- `check` prints the type of an expression.
    #check α -- `Type`: `α` has type `Type`.
    #check a -- `α`: `a` has type `α`.

As such, if `α β : Type` and `a : α`, it makes no sense to ask whether or not `a : β`. In fact, this is not even a question you can ask in Lean, it will just fail to type check.

Of course, we can still talk about sets of terms of a type. For that, we use the special type `Prop`, the type of propositions. Propositions can either be true or false. In constructive type theory, what it means for a proposition to be true is that there is a proof it. For example, if `p : Prop` is some proposition., a term `hp : p` (a term of type `p`) is a proof that the proposition holds, i.e. it is true. A false proposition is a proposition for which there is no proof.

    -- `p` is a proposition.
    variable p : Prop
    -- `hp` is a term of type `p`, that is, a proof of `p`.
    variable hp : p

The canonical false proposition is `false`. If `q` is a proposition, then it doesn't hold if and only if `p → false`.

    -- `q` is a proposition.
    variable q : Prop
    -- `hq` is a function from proofs of `q` to proofs of `false`.
    variable hq : q → false

A set of `α`, then, is a function `s : α → Prop`, that is, a function that, for each term `a : α`, assigns a propositions which is true or false, depending on whether `a` is in `s`.

    variable s : α → Prop

    -- Function application omits parenthesis.
    #check s a

Sorry.
